---
layout: module
title: Surface
abstract: Surface is intended to be an extensible low-level interface for rich text editing.
author_twitter: _mql
author: Michael Aufreiter
links: # specify links for demo and source
  source: http://github.com/substance/surface
prose_link:
  http://prose.io/#substance/substance.github.com/edit/master/_posts/modules/0100-01-02-surface.md
version: not yet released
progress: 1
contributors:
- name: Victor Saiz
  user: vectorsize
  avatar: https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4f4b3e53c3cf88845ee48fc50ccf3593?d=https://a248.e.akamai.net/assets.github.com%2Fimages%2Fgravatars%2Fgravatar-140.png
- name: Eugen Tudorancea
  user: navaru
  avatar: https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/56bc79125f691c951f7036911f2c24d8?d=https://a248.e.akamai.net/assets.github.com%2Fimages%2Fgravatars%2Fgravatar-140.png
- name: Tim Baumann
  user: timjb
  avatar: https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d6eea5713cdf2f25ebf001263fbaa9f4?d=https://a248.e.akamai.net/assets.github.com%2Fimages%2Fgravatars%2Fgravatar-140.png
- name: Michael Aufreiter
  user: michael
  avatar: https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d5a959d7e57daa5433fcb9f8da40be4b?d=https://a248.e.akamai.net/assets.github.com%2Fimages%2Fgravatars%2Fgravatar-140.png

categories:
- modules
---


Surface is intended to be an extensible low-level interface for rich text editing. It doesn't introduce any UI components, but an API for managing user-defined text annotations. For an implementation of a ritch text editor and several examples please refer to [Substance Text](https://github.com/substance/text).

## API (work-in-progress)

### Create a new surface


    var surface = new Surface({
      el: '#content'
    });


### Operations

The document is transformed using commands. Commands are either issues progammatically or triggered by the user (e.g. by entering text)

An operation to updtate text incrementally would look like so:


    var op = {
      command: "text:update",
      operation: ["ret(10)", "ins('ab')", "ret(4)", "del(2)"]
    }

Applying operations to the surface looks like so:

    surface.apply(op);


Transforming text in such a way is called [Operational Transformation](http://javascript-operational-transformation.readthedocs.org/en/latest/ot-for-javascript.html#getting-started).

Hooking into operations: (as they may be triggered by the user)


    surface.on('operation', function(operation) {
      // do something
    });


### Annotations

**Adding an annotation**

It uses the current selection, or throws an error if there


    surface.apply({
      "command": "annotation:insert",
      "id": "/comment/x", // optional
      "type": "comment",
      "data": {
        "author": "John Doe",
        "content": "You might want to spell that right. Right? :)"
      }
    });


**Listing annotations**

    // Accesss annotations
    surface.annotations(); 
    // => {
      "/comment/x": {...},
      "/em/foo": {...},
      ...
    }


### Selections

A selection object looks like so:


    {
      "start": 5,
      "end": 10
    }


Get the current selection like so:


    surface.selection();


Modify the selection programmatically:

    surface.apply({
      "command": "selection:update",
      "start": 40,
      "end": 67
    });


Hooking into selection events is easy too. `el` is a container html element sitting below the selection. You can populate it with some contextual UI stuff.


    surface.on('selection', function(selection, el) {
      $(el).html('<a href="#" class="em">Emphasize</a>');
    });



## Usage

Here's an example of how an application can use the API based on an application-specific event. In this example clicking on a em icon, triggers the addition of a new em annotation based on the current selection. 


    $('a.em').click(function() {
      surface.apply({
    	"command": "annotation:insert",
        "type": "em"
      });
    });


You can style those user defined annotations by using this class convention. 


    .surface-annotation.em {
      color: blue;
    }

You should be aware there's no magic involved. You have full control about styling here. Surface just sets the right class, based on the annotation type.

### Listening for state changes

Sometimes you may want to listen for state changes within the Surface instance, and update the UI accordingly. E.g. when the user changes the selection, and it overlaps with an `em` annotation you want to add a `.active` class to your button `a.em`.


    surface.on('selection:change', function(sel) {
      // Returns all annotations matching that selection
      var annotations = surface.annotations(sel);

      // Update the UI
      $('a.toggle-annotation').removeClass('active')
      annotations.each(function(annotation) {
        $('a.toggle-annotation.'+annotation.type).addClass('active');
      });
    });